# Open Source EV Concept Project

**Nicholas Yeung, IS 340: Integrative Project Management, Spring 2025**

# Introduction
With the continued popularization of electric vehicles, it would seem that knowledge about this developing field continues to increase value. Compared to cars powered by internal combustion engines (ICE), it would seem that the underlying technologies behind electric vehicles are not as well understood by the general student public. This is not surprising as most of the major developers in the Electric vehicle industry don’t have active support for “right to repair” and as such even those who own an electric vehicle might not even gain more technical knowledge from owning and operating an electric vehicle. EV Concept began as an idea to build an electric concept vehicle to serve as a platform to demonstrate understanding into these technologies as well as being a community-oriented approach to learn and research into how these technologies can be further developed.

# Purpose
EV Concept’s primary goal is to serve as an active and developing platform for passionate engineers to learn and develop their understanding of the technologies in the EV space. What this means is that the project itself aims to create electric vehicles from scratch periodically to allow for project contributors to apply and develop what they have learned about electric vehicles to a prototype. The secondary goal of EV concept is to participate in various events whether it be competitions, auto shows or demonstrations, this means getting the car up and running. Though this may seem like a goal inherent to the point of the project, often the pursuit of new technologies and processes can delay work to make the vehicle functional, as such it is imperative to state that an imperfect electric vehicle that runs is more suited for this project than a near perfect electric vehicle that doesn’t run at all. 

# Target Audience
The target audience for this project are mostly students. Specifically students of all disciplines as we believe that the fundamentals to the underlying technologies of EVs should be more publicly taught, in a world that is increasingly populated with EVs. Since our projects aim to educate students and depend on students contributing to the project, we aim to target students of any discipline as we believe that majors don’t define the work students can contribute to the project. Furthermore, the educational standpoint of the project hopes to educate students outside of the traditional engineering disciplines as a form of outreach to inform the greater public of how electric vehicles work so that the public can be better informed on how EVs work.

# Project Structure
The structure of the project would be in the form of several sub teams that work on the various aspects of the EV, the projects these sub teams work on would eventually be integrated, forming the EV prototype. The reason for this distributed structure is because this reduces lead times and allows everyone to work in parallel, allowing for more rapid response to changes in design. Firstly a mechanical and composites team would be needed as we will be building the physical frame, body panels and general mechanical components that will translate driver input to the EV. Next team that will be needed is an electrical team, this team will be in charge of motor controllers, battery, battery management system and various other electrical sub systems that give the EV functionality. To allow for the communication between driver, the EV and the electrical components, an embedded team is needed to make sure the EV’s information is properly and timely communicated to the driver as well as the driver’s input to the EV is transmitted as fast as possible. Finally a business team is needed to coordinate the inventory management, funds allocation, logistics and other administration duties so that the senior members of the other team can solely focus on the engineering aspect of the EV. Within each subteam are project teams that work independently on their respective projects, these projects make up the bulk of the components that go into the car and they will periodically report back to their sub team leads to properly communicate their progress. This is important as understanding the progression of each project team allows the sub-team lead a greater understanding of where they are at in terms of integrating all of their respective projects. This information is paramount as it will be heavy depended on during the Phase 3 part of the development cycle where small integration tests will need to be conducted and as such sub team leads will need to know the project’s progression in order to plan for the logistics of organizing such tests.

# Technical Infrastructure
Due to the diverse workload of each team the technical infrastructure for each team will look slightly different. For the business team, a standard issue board will be needed as most administrative tasks are time sensitive and as such will require a great amount of time management and organization in order to ensure that important tasks don’t fall through the gaps. This also ensures transparency and accountability where team leads and team members can better understand the work everyone is doing. Additionally, data storage infrastructure is also a significant concern as media and content creation falls under the purview of the business team and media along with other business data can take up space quite quickly. Finally another part of the technical infrastructure for the business team is the inventory system. A up-to-date database with the complete inventory of the car team, this ensures that there is no waste spending on superfluous gear and allows for better tracking of team materials. This database from the ground up will be custom built as having our student contributors maintain it will help them gain more project knowledge. The database will be managed using Postgres with a Node.js front end. This should reduce our technical debt as Postgres is a commonly used database management system and it can be modified if additional functionality is needed. A node.js front end should also reduce technical debt since it is a relatively common way to build a useful front end. All these projects in the business team will have proper documentation and to ensure the documentation remains useful, these documentations will be considered live documents with scheduled periodic reviews of the documentation to update it. 

Technical debt for the mechanical and composite team is mitigated by the fact that a new car prototype is designed every 2 years as such any technical debt accrued by design choices on the old car is negated by making the new one. Furthermore, CAD modeling software is quite standardized as such mechanical and composite teams won’t have much technical debt to deal with. An example of technical debt would be selecting a certain measurement for the wheel well, since that would limit the diameter of wheel size that can fit the EV; however this can be negated by conducting proper due diligence.

For the electrical team, technical debt can get in the way of things as the design choice to go with certain choices can lead to getting stuck. An example would be choosing to build a certain type of battery, this choice without proper planning can lead to headaches as the spec for this battery may not output the needed energy to keep the designed components across the car running. Another concern is certain design specifications for one generation of the car may carry down to the next simply because the team is used to running said specification however this can lead to issues down the road. 
For the embedded team, the issue of technical debt is an even greater concern since the embedded team spends a great deal of time writing code that will go into the car and if the wrong choices are made, lots of time can be wasted just to refactor the codebase. As such, it is a good idea to pick an established programming language and communication protocol, such as CAN bus and C++. Since both of these choices have been industry standard for a while and received wide support. Furthermore, the team as it stands does not need any advanced features limited by these two choices as such these two choices will be adequate for the job. Most of the code will be on gitlab as it is an accessible space to host code and will allow easy access for new members whilst maintaining the code’s integrity.
Across all these teams, a dependable storage solution is needed as each team will need to have a proper backup of their data so that future members will always be able to reference old data for upcoming projects. 

# Project Development Cycle

## Phase 1: Design and Validation (4–8 months).
The first part of this timeline deals with talking with subteam leads from mechanical, composites, electrical, embedded and business teams. These discussions will outline the specifications needed to differentiate this new EV from the existing one as well as address problems or design flaws in the existing iteration of the EV. The technical subteams are there to allow everyone input on how the EV’s functions will come together and the business team is there to iron out the details of making the EV a reality which entails budgeting, logistics and facility management discussions. After the specifications are finalized, each team will go through their own design process and come up with the projects they need to complete.

## Phase 2: Revision and Discussion (3-5 months).
After each team has made significant progress on their designs, all the team leads reconvene to look over each other’s designs to ensure that there are no significant compatibility issues. The business team comes to the meeting with more finalized figures for budgets as well as logistics information for where the building of the car will take place. After this the designs are truly finalized and the business team has conducted their due diligence, components can start being ordered and the build stage will begin.

## Phase 3: Initial build stage and refinement (Months 11+).
This is the stage where every team works to bring their vision of the car to reality. During this stage occasionally unforeseen problems will arise and as such this period tends to be the most unpredictable in terms of timeline. With various integration tests marking the tail end of this period and ending with the EV finally able to be driven.

## Phase 4: Finalization and Tuning (Months 6+).
This is the phase where the EV goes from a drivable prototype to resembling mostly to the designs agreed in Phase 2. This is also the stage where unlying problems may be discovered in the process of refinement where every subsystem is scrutinized and design flaws are ironed out.

# Community and Values
A big part of this project is a sense of community as it is a large hands-on project. However due to the distributed nature of the team this can result in the team feeling disconnected at times. Although having more social events where team members can interact with each other may slightly alleviate this issue, this may not always establish a sense of community as it may feel intimidating to more new contributors. Having smaller work and discussion meetings within project teams may help as it can allow for the development of better interpersonal connections within project teams. Having larger team wide meetings may also help as each team providing detailed presentations of their work helps individual team members to see the bigger picture and as such gain a sense of how their work contributes to the bigger picture.

# Risk Matrix

| Risk  | Likelihood | Impact | Mitigation |
|----------------------|------------|--------|--------------------------------|
| Loss of Data | Low | Med| Conduct Periodic Backups
| Loss of leadership due to graduation | High | High | Conduct more Outreach to get more members and ensure the chain of succession is established |
| Communication Issue | Low | High | Have periodic standups |
| Budget shortfall | Med | High | Have more frequent budget meetings to discuss expectations|
| Loss in Morale/Motivation | Med | Med | Host more demo and outreach events to allow more members to see what they are working on|

# Conclusion
Building an EV is a complicated endeavor and to do so with an entirely voluntary group makes this an even more challenging project. However, united by a desire to learn and the need to see our vision brought to fruition, this is definitely an endeavor that some will find worthy. There is still much more to learn and many more challenges to overcome but discovery is part of the fun when it comes to adventure. In the end this project is meant to be an iterative learning experience for all that involves themselves in it, and as EV technology continues to mature so will this project continue to develop both upon its members through their learned experience and through the newer and more advanced iterations of EVs built.

# References
Cotton, B. (2022). Program management for open source projects: How to guide your community-driven, open source project. The Pragmatic Programmers LLC.
Github. (2025, May 1). Building welcoming communities. Open Source Guides. Retrieved May 15, 2025, from https://opensource.guide/building-community/
Mozilla. (n.d.). Working open basics | 'Working open' project guide. 'Working Open' Project Guide · GitHub Pages. https://mozillascience.github.io/open-science-leadership-workshop/


